Alan Garfinkel · Jane Shevtsov · Yina Guo
Modeling Life
The Mathematics of Biological Systems


4. In mammals, resting metabolic rate M is related to body mass B as approximately
$$ M = 0.8B^{3/4}$$
a) Find the linear approximation to this function for a body mass of 100 grams.
b) An animal species that currently averages 100 grams in mass evolves to have an
average mass of 110 grams. Use the linear approximation to estimate how much
its metabolic rate would change.

5. The number of species, S, living on an island or habitat fragment of area A can be
modeled as $$S = cA^z,$$ where $z > 0$. We can measure area in units that make c = 1,
simplifying the equation into $S = A^z$ . A common value for $z$ is approximately 0.45.
Find $dS/dA$, and explain the meaning of this function and its significance for biodiversity
conservation.

6. The optimal cruising speed $V$ for a bird in flight is given by the allometric equation
$V = 12M^{1/6}
where $M$ is the mass of the bird in kilograms, and $V$ is in meters per second. The average
female bald eagle weighs around 5.6 kg. Find the linear approximation to the equation
above at $M = 5.6$. If a female American golden eagle is about 0.7 kg lighter than a
bald eagle, how much faster or slower would you expect its optimal cruising speed to
be? (Note: You can check that your answer is in the ballpark by just plugging numbers
into the equation above, but the point of this problem is to use a linear approximation
to arrive at your answer.)


You are studying a plant population whose age distribution is given by $X(a) = \frac{10}{9} \frac{1}{a^2}$,
where a is age in years. The smallest individuals you can reliably identify are one year
old, so the age distribution starts at 1, and the plant can live no longer than ten years.
What fraction of the population is between 3 and 6 years old?


5. A building has solar panels on the roof. The graph below shows the amount of
power generated by the solar panels. Assume you have the data used to generate the
graph, sampled so frequently that it may be regarded as continuous. Describe how you
would compute the total amount of electricity generated between 9 a.m. and 11 a.m.

2. The spread of a genetic mutation in a population of mice can be modeled by the differential
equation
$P' = 2P  (1 − P)  (1 − 3P)$
where P is the fraction of the mice that have the new gene. (This means that $0 \leq $P \leq 1.)

a) Find the equilibrium points of this model and determine the stability of each one.
b) If 10% of the mice have the new gene (so P = 0.1) initially, what fraction of the
population will have the new gene in the long run?
c) What if the initial fraction is 90% of the mice?

Collagen is a key protein in connective tissues. One of the steps in collagen formation
involves the combination of three molecules of a collagen precursor called propeptide.
This occurs with rate constant k. The rate of formation of propeptide is a constant, f .
The propeptide also degrades with per molecule degradation rate d. Write a differential
equation for the concentration of propeptide, P.

6. Spotted owls (W) prey almost exclusively on red-backed voles (V ). Use the following
assumptions to write a differential equation model of this system.
– The vole population has a per capita birth rate of 0.1 and a per capita death rate of
0.025.
– The rate at which an individual owl eats voles is proportional to the vole population
with a proportionality constant of 0.01.
– The owl birth rate is proportional to the amount of food they consume, with a proportionality
constant of 0.05.
– Owls have a constant per capita death rate of 0.1.


7. Przewalski’s horse, a wild horse that inhabits central Asia, is the only horse species never
to have been domesticated. In the wild, these horses are preyed upon by wolves. Write
a model of the populations of Przewalski’s horses (P) and wolves (W) based on the
following assumptions.
– The horse per capita birth rate is 0.15.
– The horse per capita death rate is proportional to the population size, with proportionality
constant 0.01.
– Wolves prey on many species other than horses, so their per capita birth rate can be
modeled as a constant, 0.1.
– Wolves have a constant per capita death rate of 0.05.
– A horse’s probability of being eaten by a wolf is proportional to the number of wolves,
with a proportionality constant of 0.02.

8. Kelp (K), sea urchins (U), and sea otters (S) form a food chain off the coast of northern
California. Use the following assumptions to write a differential equation model of the
food chain.
– Kelp grows at a per biomass (like per capita) rate of 0.02.
– Due to shading, kelp dies at a per biomass rate proportional to the amount of kelp
with a proportionality constant of 0.01.
– Sea urchins eat kelp. A single sea urchin consumes kelp at a rate of 0.05 per month.
– The sea urchin birth rate is proportional to the amount of kelp the urchins consume,
with a proportionality constant of 0.2.
– Sea urchins die of natural causes at a per capita rate of 0.01.
– The rate at which a single sea otter eats sea urchins is proportional to the sea urchin
population with a proportionality constant of 0.03.
– The sea otter birth rate is proportional to the amount of sea urchins the otters
consume, with a proportionality constant of 0.01.
– Sea otters die at a per capita rate of 0.001.

9. The pier in Santa Monica, CA, is a popular destination for both tourists and locals.
Visitors ride the Ferris wheel (F), eat ice cream (C), or just walk around on the pier
(W). Write a dynamical model for the numbers of people engaged in these activities
given the following assumptions. (Hint: Start by drawing a diagram of this system and
labeling the stocks and flows.)
– People entering the pier always start by just walking around.
– E people enter the pier each minute.
– Visitors leave at a constant per capita rate d. They can leave only when they are
walking around.
– Due to fear of nausea, people do not go directly from eating ice cream to riding the
Ferris wheel.
– Visitors prefer to go on the Ferris wheel with friends. Thus, the probability that any
one individual will go on the Ferris wheel is proportional to the number of people
walking around, with proportionality constant b.
– Riders leave the Ferris wheel at per capita rate n.
– When visitors leave the Ferris wheel, a fraction z of them go directly to eating ice
cream. The others walk around.
– Visitors who are walking around prefer to avoid long lines for ice cream. Thus, the per
capita rate at which they get ice cream is proportional to the inverse of the number
of people already doing so, with proportionality constant m.
– People who are eating ice cream stop doing so at a constant per capita rate k.